# Discovery

_Discovery_ is a next-generation pulsar-timing-array data-analysis package, _built for speed_ on a [JAX](https://jax.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) backend that supports GPU execution and autodifferentiation.
If [Enterprise](https://github.com/nanograv/enterprise) is Spock, logical and elegant, _Discovery_ is all Scotty, fast, efficient, and not above a hack if it gets you to warp speed.

# Requirements

_Discovery_ needs `numpy`, `scipy`, `jax`, `pyarrow`.

# Data model

The data model consists of `Kernel` objects (think of a noise matrix `N`, which can be inverted and applied to a vector, `N^{-1} y`, or even sandwiched with it, `y^T N^{-1} y`) and of `GP` objects, consisting of a basis `F` (sized `ntoas x ngp`) and a prior/kernel `Phi`. The kernel `ShermanMorrisonKernel(N, F, P)` combines a noise kernel and a GP.

## Pulsar data

_Discovery_ uses lightweight `Pulsar` objects saved as Arrow Feather files. To convert an _Enterprise_ `Pulsar` objects use `discovery.Pulsar.save_feather(psr, filename, noisedict)`, where noisedict is an optional dictionary of default parameter values. Some example datasets (based on NG 15yr) are included in the `data` folder.

## Noise and signal components (`signals.py`)

- `residuals(psr)`: just a `numpy` array of residuals for pulsar `psr`.

- `makenoise_measurement(psr, [noisedict])`: returns a `Kernel` object that implements EFAC + EQUAD measurement noise for pulsar `psr`. Parameters are multiplexed to pulsar and backend (e.g., `B1855+09_430_ASP_efac`), _Enterprise_-style. If those parameters appear is `noisedict`, their values will be frozen to those specifications.
- `makenoise_measurement_simple(psr, [noisedict])`: same, but no backends.
- `makegp_ecorr(psr, [noisedict])`: returns a `GP` object that implements ECORR measurement noise for pulsar `psr`. The quantization style. Parameters are multiplexed to pulsar and backend, and frozen if included in noisedict.
- `makegp_ecorr_simple(psr, [noisedict])`: same, but no backends.

- `makegp_fourier(psr, prior, components, [T, fourierbasis, common, name])`: returns a `GP` object that implements a finite GP over a vector basis. Here `prior` must be a JAX-ready function with signature `priorfunc(f, df, arg1, [...])`, where `f` is a vector of frequencies, and `df` a vector of integration weights associated with the frequencies. The resulting GP parameters are named `{psrname}_{name}_{argX}`, unless they are included in the list `common`. The Fourier basis is generated by calling `fourierbasis(psr, components, T)` (see below), which must return `(f, df, F)`. In this function `T` defaults to the pulsar span.
- `makegp_fourier_global(psrs, prior, orf, components, T, [fourierbasis, name])`: returns a `GlobalVariableGP` object that implements a GP for all pulsars together, with a matched Fourier basis. Here `prior` is the same as for `makegp_fourier` (with GP parameters named `{name}_{argX}`), and `orf` must be a function `orf(pos1, pos2)` of two numpy vectors, such as `hd_orf`, `monopole_orf`, `dipole_orf`, and the diagonal `uncorrelated_orf`. The Fourier basis is generated by calling `fourierbasis(psr, components, T)` (see below), which must return `(f, df, F)`. In this function `T` does not have a default (but see `getspan`). If `prior` and `orf` are given as equal-length lists of functions, the object implements the composite process `sum_i GP(prior[i], orf[i])` (with GP parameters named `{name}_{orf[i].__name__}_{argX}`).
- `makegp_fourier_allpsr(psrs, prior, components, T, [fourierbasis, common, name])`: returns a `GlobalVariableGP` that implements uncorrelated GPs for each pulsar, which matched Fourier bases. Here `prior` is the same as for `makegp_fourier` (with GP parameters named `{psrname}_{name}_{argX}`). This object is useful, e.g., to obtain conditional RN coefficients in a CURN or HD model.

- `makegp_improper(psr, fmat, [constant, name])`: returns a `GP` object with improper prior (formally, a constant vector equal to `constant`) and basis matrix `fmat`. Here `constant` defaults to `1e40`.
- `makegp_timing(psr, [constant], [variance])`: convenience function to call `makegp_improper` with the pulsar design matrix `psr.Mmat` and prior diagonal value `constant`. Design-matrix columns are normalized. To obtain "physical" priors, use `variance` to a value in s^2 (e.g., `1e-12``) instead of setting `constant`.

## GP basis and priors (`signals.py`)

- `fourierbasis(psr, components, [T])`: returns `(f, df, F)` for a basis of interleaved sines and cosines evaluated over `psr` TOAs with frequencies `k/T`, with `k = 1, ..., components`. Again `T` defaults to the pulsar span.
- `dmfourierbasis(psr, components, [T, fref])`: same, but rescales the basis by `(fref / psr.freqs)**2`, useful to define DMGP. Here `T` defaults to the pulsar span and `fref` to 1400.

- `getspan(psr or psrs)`: returns the TOA span of the pulsar or iterable of pulsars. Useful for `makegp_fourier` and `makegp_fourier_global`.

- `powerlaw(f, df, log10_A, gamma)`: implements the standard red-noise/GW spectrum `10^(2 log10_A) f^(-gamma) (yr^(gamma - 3) / pi^2 / 12) df`. This is a JAX-ready function, so one would pass `powerlaw` to `makegp_fourier`.
- `freespectrum(f, df, log10_rho: typing.Sequence)`: implements `10^(2 log10_rho)`. Note that `makegp_fourier` uses the `log10_rho` annotation to treat it as a vector; the resulting parameter name would be, e.g., `B1855+09_fourierGP_log10_rho(10)` if `components = 10`.
- `makepowerlaw_crn(components)`: makes the prior for a combined red-noise/common-process GP, limiting the common-process to `components` frequencies. Returns a function with the signature `powerlaw_crn(f, df, log10_A, gamma, crn_log10_A, crn_gamma)`; calling `makegp_fourier(..., common=['crn_log10_A, crn_gamma'], name='rednoise')` would then result in parameter names `['B1855+09_rednoise_log10_A', 'B1855+09_rednoise_gamma', ..., 'crn_log10_A', 'crn_gamma']`.

## Delays (`signals.py`)

- `makedelay(psr, delayfunc, [common, name])`: returns a JAX-ready function that implements a deterministic delay for `psr`. Here `delayfunc` must be a JAX-ready function with signature `delayfunc(arg1, ...)`. The resulting delay parameters are named `{psrname}_{name}_{argX}`, unless they are included in the list `common`.
- `make_solardm(psr)` [in `solar.py`]: calculates the DM delay in a 1/r^2 solar wind density model. Returns a function with signature `solardm(n_earth)`.
- `make_chromaticdecay(psr)` [in `solar.py`]: calculates a chromatic exponential-dip delay. Returns a function with signature `decay(t0, log10_Amp, log10_tau, idx)`.

## Likelihood (`likelihood.py`)

- `PulsarLikelihood(signals, concat=True)`: returns a `PulsarLikelihood` object, with a `logL` property that implements the single-pulsar likelihood as a JAX-ready function. The likelihood takes as a single argument a dictionary of parameters named as discussed above. Here `signals` is an iterable that must contain exactly one residual vector, exactly one noise `Kernel`, any number of `GP` objects, and any number of deterministic delays (any callable). If `concat=False`, the likelihood is built by nesting `ShermanMorrisonKernel`s, first consuming `ConstantGP` objects (those without parameters) and then `VariableGP`, but otherwise respecting the order in `signals`. If `concat=True`, the `ConstantGP`s and `VariableGP`s are separately concatenated, and then nested.
- `GlobalLikelihood(psls, globalgp=None)`: returns `GlobalLikelihood` object, with a `logL` property that implements the multi-pulsar likelihood as a JAX-ready function. The likelihood takes as a single argument a dictionary of parameters. Here `psls` is an iterable that may contain any number of `PulsarLikelihood` objects, and `globalgp` is a `GlobalVariableGP` object, such as returned by `makegp_fourier_global`, encoding a joint GP for all pulsars.

- The two likelihood objects have a `sample` property—a JAX-ready function that generates a random realization of the data if given a JAX key and a dictionary of parameters. (According to JAX protocol, `sample` actually return a tuple consisting of the "split" key and the data realization.)
- The `PulsarLikelihood` and `GlobalLikelihood` objects have a `sample_conditional(key, params) -> (key, dict)` property–a JAX-ready function that returns a dictionary of GP coefficients drawn from the conditional (normal) probability distribution of the parameter-dependent GPs (for `PulsarLikelihood`) or of the `globalgp`(s), given the `params`. This function calls `GlobalLikelihood.conditional(params)`, which returns a concatenated vector `mu` of the mean GP coefficients and the result `cf` of running `scipy.linalg.cho_factor` on the matrix `Phi^-1 + T^t K T`, where `Phi` and `T` are prior and basis of the relevant GP.
<!-- To get the actual covariance matrix, one would use `cho_solve(cf, identity)`. -->

## Priors (`prior.py`)

- `makelogprior_uniform(params, [priordict])`: returns a function `logprior(params)` that evaluates the total log prior according to `priordict` (given, e.g., as `{'FourierGP_log10_A': [-18, -11]'}`). Some standard [`enterprise_extensions`](https://github.com/nanograv/enterprise_extensions) priors are included by default (e.g., `crn_log10_A, crn_gamma, gw_log10_A, gw_gamma, ...`). Parameters that are in the list `params` but are not in `priordict` and have no default are not included in the computation.
- `sample_uniform(params, [priordict])`: creates a dictionary of random values for the parameters in the list `params`, using the uniform priors in `priordict` or in the system default. Fails if a parameter in `params` has no specification.

## Optimal statistic (`os.py`)

- `OS(gbl)`: creates an optimal statistic object, where `gbl` is a `GlobalLikelihood` in which each `PulsarLikelihood` has a `makegp_fourier` component named `gw` with at least the common parameter `gw_log10_A`. The prior and Fourier basis from that GP will be used to build the OS. If the `GlobalLikelihood` has a `globalgp`, it is unused.
- `OS.os(params, [orfa])`: returns the dictionary `{'os': ..., 'os_sigma': ..., 'snr': ..., 'log10_A': ...}` as computed for `params`. `orfa` defaults to `hd_orfa` but can also be `dipole_orfa` or `monopole_orfa`—these are all functions of the cosine between pulsars. `OS.os` can be jitted and vmapped over params. (If one wishes to use the `orfa` argument, the jitting/vmapping syntax is more complicated: `jax.jit(os.os, static_argnums=1)` and `jax.vmap(os.os, in_axes=(0, None))`.)
- `OS.scramble(params, pos, [orfa])`: returns the same dictionary as `OS.os`, using the pulsar positions in `pos` (either a list of three-vectors or an `npsr x 3` array). `OS.scramble` can be jitted and vmapped over params (`jax.vmap(os.scramble, (0, None))`) or positions (`jax.vmap(os.scramble, (None, 0))`).
- `OS.shift(params, phases, [orfa])`: returns the same dictionary as `OS.os`, shifting the GW basis vectors by the phases in `phases` (an `npsr x ngw` array of floats in [0,2*pi]). `OS.shift` can be jitted and vmapped over params or phases.
- `OS.gx2cdf(params, xs, cutoff=1e-6, limit=100, epsabs=1e-6)`: returns a vector of the GX2 OS CDF evaluated at the SNRs `xs`. The CDF is computed by considering only GPs (i.e., not white noise), using Imhof's method. The parameters `limit` and `epsabs` are passed to `scipy.integrate.quad`. If `cutoff` is a float, GX2 eigenvalues are limited to those larger than `cutoff`; if `cutoff` is an integer, only the `cutoff` largest eigenvalues are used. Currently this function cannot be jitted or vmapped.

# Example usage

The following implements a standard NANOGrav likelihood + prior for pulsar `psr`, with free parameters `['{psrname}_rednoise_gamma', '{psrname}_rednoise_log10_A', 'crn_gamma', 'crn_log10_A']`:

```
import discovery as ds

psl = ds.PulsarLikelihood([psr.residuals,
                           ds.makenoise_measurement(psr, noisedict),
                           ds.makegp_ecorr(psr, noisedict),
                           ds.makegp_timing(psr),
                           ds.makegp_fourier(psr, ds.powerlaw, 30, name='rednoise'),
                           ds.makegp_fourier(psr, ds.powerlaw, 14, common=['crn_log10_A', 'crn_gamma'], name='crn')])
logl = psl.logL
logp = dp.makelogprior_uniform(logl.params)
```

Then you would use `jax.jit(logl)` (and perhaps `jax.jit(jax.grad(logl)))`) and `jax.jit(logp)` in inference.

The following implements a standard NANOGrav HD likelihood:

```
import discovery as ds

Tspan = ds.getspan(psrs)
gbl = ds.GlobalLikelihood((ds.PulsarLikelihood([psr.residuals,
                                                ds.makenoise_measurement(psr, noisedict),
                                                ds.makegp_ecorr(psr, noisedict),
                                                ds.makegp_timing(psr),
                                                ds.makegp_fourier(psr, ds.powerlaw, 30, T=Tspan, name='rednoise')
                                                ]) for psr in psrs),
                          ds.makegp_fourier_global(psrs, ds.powerlaw, ds.hd_orf, 14, T=Tspan, name='gw'))
logl = gbl.logL
logp = dp.makelogprior_uniform(logl.params)
```

To create a random realization of a model (e.g., `gbl`) as a function of its parameters:

```
sampler = gbl.sampler

p0 = ds.sample_uniform(sampler.params)
key = jax.random.PRNGKey(42)

key, y = sampler(key, p0)
```

To simulate residuals for a pulsar based on an existing dataset:

```
psr = ds.Pulsar.read_feather('data/NG15yr-B1855+09.feather')

psl = ds.PulsarLikelihood([psr.residuals,
                           ds.makenoise_measurement(psr, psr.noisedict),
                           ds.makegp_ecorr(psr, psr.noisedict),
                           ds.makegp_timing(psr, variance=1e-12),
                           ds.makegp_fourier(psr, ds.powerlaw, 30, name='rednoise'),
                           ds.makegp_fourier(psr, ds.powerlaw, 14, common=['crn_log10_A', 'crn_gamma'], name='crn')
                           ])

sampler = psl.sample

# fix parameters to reasonable value
noisedict_red = {p: v for p,v in psr.noisedict.items() if 'rednoise' in p}
params = {**ds.sample_uniform(sampler.params), **noisedict_red, 'crn_gamma': 4.3, 'crn_log10_A': -14.5}

# should jit the sampler if simulating many datasets
key = ds.rngkey(42)
key, res = sampler(key, params)

# update Pulsar object if desired (make PulsarLikelihood anew to analyze)
psr.residuals = res
```

To simulate residuals for an array:

```
import glob
psrs = [ds.Pulsar.read_feather(f) for f in glob.glob('data/*.feather')[:5]]

Tspan = ds.getspan(psrs)

gbl = ds.GlobalLikelihood((ds.PulsarLikelihood([psr.residuals,
                                                ds.makenoise_measurement(psr, psr.noisedict),
                                                ds.makegp_ecorr(psr, psr.noisedict),
                                                ds.makegp_timing(psr, variance=1e-14),
                                                ds.makegp_fourier(psr, ds.powerlaw, 30, T=Tspan, name='rednoise')
                                                ]) for psr in psrs),
                          ds.makegp_fourier_global(psrs, ds.powerlaw, ds.hd_orf, 14, T=Tspan, name='gw'))

sampler = gbl.sample

noisedict_red = {p: v for psr in psrs for p,v in psr.noisedict.items() if 'rednoise' in p}
params = {**ds.sample_uniform(sampler.params), **noisedict_red, 'crn_gamma': 4.3, 'crn_log10_A': -14.5}

key = ds.rngkey(43)
key, res = sampler(key, params)
```

To load and save PTMCMC chain files into Pandas tables:

```
chain = ds.read_chain('PTMCMC_example_output')
ds.save_chain(chain, 'example_chain.feather')
chain = ds.read_chain('example_chain.feather')
```

Note that the resulting Pandas tables will contain useful attributes `chain.attr['noisedict']` (a Python dict), `chain.attr['priors']` (a list of strings), and `chain.attr['runtime_info']` (the `runtime_info.txt` file rendered as a list of strings).
